docs: dynamic host volume specification (#24810)
hashicorp/nomad: website/content/docs/other-specifications/volume/csi.mdx

to the controller plugin, and if required by the controller, also to the
node plugins for each allocation that has a claim on the volume.

## Examples

### Volume registration

This is an example file used for the [`volume register`][] command.

```hcl
id              = "ebs_prod_db1"
name            = "database"
type            = "csi"
external_id     = "vol-23452345"
plugin_id       = "ebs-prod"

capability {
  access_mode     = "single-node-reader-only"
  attachment_mode = "file-system"
}

capability {
  access_mode     = "single-node-writer"
  attachment_mode = "file-system"
}

mount_options {
  fs_type     = "ext4"
  mount_flags = ["noatime"]
}

topology_request {
  required {
    topology { segments { "rack" = "R2" } }
    topology { segments { "rack" = "R1", "zone" = "us-east-1a"} }
  }
}

secrets {
  example_secret = "xyzzy"
}

parameters {
  skuname = "Premium_LRS"
}

context {
  endpoint = "http://192.168.1.101:9425"
}
```

### Example Volume Expansion

Either [`volume create`][] or [`volume register`][] commands can trigger
an expand to occur, after the volume has already been created or registered.

> Example using `volume create`, with a `volume.hcl` file:

Reviewer: Actually, now that I've updated the language, I'd rather see these steps as an ordered list. I can do that if you'd like.

> Example using `volume create`, with a `volume.hcl` file:

Author: I'm not sure exactly what you mean here, given the interspersed example shell sessions.

```hcl
id        = "ebs_prod_db1"
name      = "database"
type      = "csi"
plugin_id = "ebs-prod"

capacity_min = "50gib"
capacity_max = "50gib"

# ... etc ...
```

Create the volume:

```shell-session
$ nomad volume create volume.hcl
Created external volume vol-asdf1234 with ID ebs_prod_db1
```

Review its current capacity with [`volume status`][]:

```shell-session
$ nomad volume status ebs_prod_db1 | grep Capacity
Capacity             = 50 GiB
```

Update `volume.hcl`:

```hcl
id        = "ebs_prod_db1"
name      = "database"
type      = "csi"
plugin_id = "ebs-prod"
# all of the above must remain the same

capacity_min = "100gib" # double
capacity_max = "100gib" # increased to match

# ... etc ...
```

Run `volume create` again:

```shell-session
$ nomad volume create volume.hcl
Created external volume vol-asdf1234 with ID ebs_prod_db1
```

Check the volume capacity again:

```shell-session
$ nomad volume status ebs_prod_db1 | grep Capacity
Capacity             = 100 GiB
```

If you encounter errors that are not clear from the command output,

> the CSI plugin allocation logs and/or Nomad leader server logs may be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the CSI plugin allocation logs and Nomad leader server logs may be
```

- `parameters` <code>(map<string|string>:nil)</code> - An optional key-value
  map of strings passed directly to the CSI plugin to configure the volume. The
  details of these parameters are specific to each storage provider, so consult
  the specific plugin documentation for more information.

- `plugin_id` `(string: <required>)` - The ID of the [CSI plugin][csi_plugin]
  that manages this volume.

- `secrets` <code>(map<string|string>:nil)</code> - An optional key-value map
  of strings used as credentials for publishing and unpublishing volumes.

- `snapshot_id` `(string: <optional>)` - If the storage provider supports
  snapshots, the external ID of the snapshot to restore when creating this
  volume. If omitted, the volume will be created from scratch. The
  `snapshot_id` cannot be set if the `clone_id` field is set. Only allowed on
  volume creation.

- `topology_request` <code>([TopologyRequest][topology_request]: nil)</code> -
  Specify locations (region, zone, rack, etc.) where the provisioned volume
  must be accessible from in the case of volume creation or the locations
  where the existing volume is accessible from in the case of volume

>   registration.

Author: The bold was kind of all over the place and somewhat distracting, so I've mostly kept that out in this iteration. But I'll add that comma.

status`][] command, and re-issue either [`volume create`][] or [`volume
register`][].

Nomad reconciles the requested capacity by issuing expand volume requests to the
controller plugin, and if required by the controller, also to the node plugins
for each allocation that has a claim on the volume.

## Examples

### Volume registration

This is an example file used for the [`volume register`][] command.

```hcl
id              = "ebs_prod_db1"
name            = "database"
type            = "csi"
external_id     = "vol-23452345"
plugin_id       = "ebs-prod"

capability {
  access_mode     = "single-node-reader-only"
  attachment_mode = "file-system"
}

capability {
  access_mode     = "single-node-writer"
  attachment_mode = "file-system"
}

mount_options {
  fs_type     = "ext4"
  mount_flags = ["noatime"]
}

topology_request {
  required {
    topology { segments { "rack" = "R2" } }
    topology { segments { "rack" = "R1", "zone" = "us-east-1a"} }
  }
}

secrets {
  example_secret = "xyzzy"
}

parameters {
  skuname = "Premium_LRS"
}

context {
  endpoint = "http://192.168.1.101:9425"
}
```

### Example Volume Expansion

> Either [`volume create`][] or [`volume register`][] commands can trigger
> an expand to occur, after the volume has already been created or registered.
> 
> Example using `volume create`, with a `volume.hcl` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Either [`volume create`][] or [`volume register`][] commands can trigger
an expand to occur, after the volume has already been created or registered.

This example shows you how to expand a volume using the `volume create` command.
```

> 
> ```hcl
> id        = "ebs_prod_db1"
> name      = "database"
> type      = "csi"
> plugin_id = "ebs-prod"
> 
> capacity_min = "50gib"
> capacity_max = "50gib"
> 
> # ... etc ...
> ```
> 
> Next, use the [`volume create`][] command and the `volume.hcl` file to create
> the volume.
> 
> ```shell-session
> $ nomad volume create volume.hcl
> Created external volume vol-asdf1234 with ID ebs_prod_db1
> ```
> 
> Review the volume's current capacity with the [`volume status`][] command.
> 
> ```shell-session
> $ nomad volume status ebs_prod_db1 | grep Capacity
> Capacity             = 50 GiB
> ```
> 
> Next, to increase volume capacity, update the `capacity_min` and `capcity_max`
> fields in the `volume.hcl` file.
> 
> ```hcl
> id        = "ebs_prod_db1"
> name      = "database"
> type      = "csi"
> plugin_id = "ebs-prod"
> # all of the above must remain the same
> 
> capacity_min = "100gib" # double
> capacity_max = "100gib" # increased to match
> 
> # ... etc ...
> ```
> 
> Run the `volume create` command to expand the volume.
> 
> ```shell-session
> $ nomad volume create volume.hcl
> Created external volume vol-asdf1234 with ID ebs_prod_db1
> ```
> 
> Use the `volume status` command to make sure the volume has the new capacity.
> 
> ```shell-session
> $ nomad volume status ebs_prod_db1 | grep Capacity
> Capacity             = 100 GiB
> ```
> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion
1. Create a volume configuration file called `volume.hcl` that defines ID, name,
   type, plugin ID, and capacity.

   ```hcl
   id        = "ebs_prod_db1"
   name      = "database"
   type      = "csi"
   plugin_id = "ebs-prod"

   capacity_min = "50gib"
   capacity_max = "50gib"

   # ... etc ...
   ```

1. Create the volume using the [`volume create`] command.

   ```shell-session
   $ nomad volume create volume.hcl
   Created external volume vol-asdf1234 with ID ebs_prod_db1
   ```

1.  Review the volume's current capacity using the [`volume status`] command.

   ```shell-session
   $ nomad volume status ebs_prod_db1 | grep Capacity
   Capacity             = 50 GiB
   ```

1. Increase volume capacity in the `volume.hcl` file.

   Update the `capacity_min` and `capacity_max` fields.

   ```hcl
   id        = "ebs_prod_db1"
   name      = "database"
   type      = "csi"
   plugin_id = "ebs-prod"
   # all of the above must remain the same

   capacity_min = "100gib" # double
   capacity_max = "100gib" # increased to match

   # ... etc ...
   ```

1. Expand the volume using the [`volume create`] command.

   ```shell-session
   $ nomad volume create volume.hcl
   Created external volume vol-asdf1234 with ID ebs_prod_db1
   ```

1. Review the new capacity by running the [`volume status`] command.

   ```shell-session
   $ nomad volume status ebs_prod_db1 | grep Capacity
   Capacity             = 100 GiB
   ```

````
